>>This?
>>Yeah.
>>OK.
>>No, you have the mike.
>>No, we don't.
>>[INAUDIBLE]
And I think we're set.
OK.
So welcome, everyone.
And it's great fun to
have you here, Deepak.
Welcome so much to Tibet House.
We're really grateful for it.
>>Thank you.
>>We really are.
[APPLAUSE]
>>Thanks.
>>And Deepak and I have
been doing different things.
And it's really wonderful
to discover you, Deepak.
It really is.
So now anyway,
tonight, I guess we're
going to mediate, or discuss,
the meeting, the encounter
of Buddha and God,
whatever that is.
They have had some
encounters in the past,
I believe, actually, as recorded
in the various scriptures
from the Buddhist side.
I don't know if
in the Abrahamic--
I don't think they have any
account of Jehovah meeting
Buddha.
He didn't report back on it
anyway-- at least not to Moses.
Anyway, I'll turn the
floor over to you,
and you lead off
in this dialogue.
>>It's all right if I stand up?
>>Absolutely.
>>I'll be more comfortable.
Well, I was thinking
as I was traveling
to New York-- because we hadn't
actually announced the topic--
or I wasn't aware of what
the topic was going to be--
but what I was struggling with
was the idea that-- looking
back at my own life,
personally, I've been always
interested in the abstract,
in the metaphysical,
in these great journeys into
the infinite and the unbounded
and the eternal, and trying to
figure it out intellectually.
And about less
than a year ago-- I
don't know the exact date--
I was at the Royal Albert
Hall in England and
happened to have
a very wonderful private
meeting with His Holiness
the Dalai Lama.
And we got into some
abstract discussions--
because that's where I always
direct people, even the Dalai
Lama.
And he stopped me
in the middle of it
and he said, it's
interesting, and one
can go on into
abstractions forever,
but how does it change our life?
And how does
knowing what you are
trying to express
right now-- how does it
change people's lives?
And I realized that His
Holiness-- even though he
can if he wants to take the
same journeys even into a more
extended domain of awareness--
that he's a very practical man.
And ultimately
what really matters
is the essence of Buddhism is
the alleviation of suffering.
Even the Buddha
himself was not really
interested in the abstractions
of reincarnation theories
or the different
realms of being--
even though Tibetan Buddhism
is the authority in all
of those areas.
The Buddha himself was only
interested in one question--
what is the cause
of human suffering,
and what is the way out of it?
That's the essence of
Buddhism basically.
And so I'm not going to
steal the thunder from Bob--
>>Steal away.
>>--who's the
expert in this area,
but I'd like to start off with
just that one question from
a Vedantic perspective.
>>Please.
>>Then perhaps what
we can do is draw
the parallels between
Vedanta and Buddhism
if that's all right.
>>Absolutely.
>>Because essentially it's a
question of semantics, I think.
So Vedanta, which is the great
wisdom tradition of India that
goes back at least 1500 BC--
and the authors of the Vedanta
are the great Rishis who
span several eras of time,
especially the ones who
wrote the Upanishads.
If I could summarize
what Vedanta says about
the subject-- and, in fact,
if I could summarize the whole
of Vedanta in the
next 10 minutes--
it would be as follows--
Vedanta says that there
are five reasons why
human beings suffer,
and these five
are called kleshas in Sanskrit.
K-L-E-S-H-A-S. The first klesha,
or the first cause of human
suffering, is not knowing
the true nature of reality.
Number one-- not knowing
The second klesha-- number
two-- is clinging to or grasping
or holding on to that which
is ephemeral, transitory,
illusionary, insubstantial,
and therefore not real.
The second cause of suffering.
The third cause of suffering--
the third klesha-- is aversion
to, revulsion to,
fear from, or fear
of that which is insubstantial,
transitory ephemeral, not real,
illusionary.
The fourth cause of
suffering is identification
with the false and
constricted and habitual self,
which we call the ego.
And the fifth cause of
suffering-- the fifth klesha--
is the fear of death.
And Vedanta says, that's it.
These are the five reasons
why humans suffer--
not knowing the true
nature of reality,
grasping to things
that aren't real,
running away from and fearing
things that are not real,
identification
with a false self--
a constricted self--
and the fear of death.
Period.
All other causes of suffering
can be somehow connected
to these five.
And then Vedanta goes on
to say that these five are
contained in the first one.
The five kleshas are
So the only cause
of suffering is not
knowing the true
nature of reality.
The only cause of
suffering is not
knowing the true
nature of reality.
Vedanta says the true nature
of reality is Brahman.
Brahman is a word,
like any other.
And if you ask a Vedantist
to describe it, he can't.
He says he/she cannot
describe what Brahman is,
except to call it that.
T-H-A-T. The English word that.
In Sanskrit, tat.
>>Tat.
And Vedanta says, I am that,
you are that, all this is
that, that's all there is.
And if you really,
really get that, then I
have nothing more to say.
Good night.
Thanks for coming.
[LAUGHTER]
Vedantists refer
to Brahman as that.
It's infinite.
It's immortal.
It's eternal.
It's ineffable.
It's unbounded.
It is silent.
It has infinite dynamism.
It has infinite intelligence.
And it is it, whatever it is.
And this Brahman projects
itself as the universe
through what is called
the power of Maya.
Brahman projects itself
as the physical universe,
including you and me,
through the power of Maya.
The word Maya means--
technically, etymologically--
it means measurement, although
it's translated frequently
as illusion, because what you're
trying to measure is eternity,
or the infinite.
And in the measurement
of the infinite,
you create the concept of
time and you give birth
to the relative universe.
So Maya, measurement, meter--
the English word meter,
which also is something you
use to measure-- Maya, meter,
measurement, time,
music, matter, all refer
to the womb of creation, which
is the infinite, unbounded womb
of creation which
projects itself
through the power of Maya
into the realm of space-time
and causation.
And it does so through
the web of karma.
Karma is our own past actions
on an individual level,
but also on a collective
level, and ultimately
from a deeper, more
mythical level.
The remnants of karma--
our past actions-- they
are like seeds in
our consciousness.
And these remnants
of karma constantly
actualize into our consciousness
as our subjective experience.
They're just the seeds of past
memories, past experiences.
They're not the
memories themselves.
They are virtual memories.
Just like you have virtual
photons and virtual particles,
they're virtual memories
that don't actually
exist in the brain,
because they are part
of the software of our souls.
I was watching the other
day on "60 minutes"
the person who just wrote
Mr. Reagan's biography.
I don't know if you
saw that program,
but there's a very
poignant moment
in the program where
he says that he's
a family friend of Mr. Reagan.
And apparently Mr.
Reagan recently
came from a therapy session.
And somebody had left
a toy White House
next to the fish tank.
And Mr. Reagan was
clutching onto it--
holding onto it when he came.
And Nancy Reagan tried
to pry his fingers open,
and he wouldn't let go of it.
And finally she
said to him, Ronnie,
what's that in your hand?
And he looked at it for a
minute or so, and he said,
I don't know what
it is, but I think
it has something to do with me.
I don't know what
it is, but I think
it has something to do with me.
That's what a sanskara is.
That's what a
potential memory is.
That's the remnant of karma.
And I looked at that program
and realized we all have
Alzheimer's.
All of us.
We all have spiritual
Alzheimer's.
>>I'm very relieved
to hear that.
>>OK.
[LAUGHTER]
>>I thought it was only me.
>>Yeah.
We have this memory.
We have this faint memory
that somewhere there
is a soul over here--
a faint memory that
somewhere there's a soul here.
We know it has
something to do with me,
and we have no idea what it is.
And that's what Vedanta says is
the cause of all our suffering.
In fact, the Bible
says that, too.
What good does it do a man
to find the whole world
but lose his own soul?
And losing the soul,
we begin to have
the experience of suffering.
So this karmic software,
which is constantly
actualizing into
our consciousness,
it appears as our own thoughts,
our own memories, our desires,
our feelings, our emotions.
And during the daytime what
we do is-- our rational mind,
it weaves stories around
this karmic software.
It does so quite logically,
at least to the rational mind.
And we live out these stories.
We call them everyday reality.
And the same thing
happens at night,
but the rational mind is asleep.
And so there is not a consistent
logic to the stories at night,
and we call them dreams.
But Vedanta says the mechanics
of the dream and the mechanics
of waking state of
consciousness, it's the same.
One is being given a
rationalization and the other
isn't, but it's just your karmic
software that is appearing
in your consciousness
and that you're
making stories out
of them and you're
living these stories out.
And you get so caught
up in the melodrama
and the hysteria of the
stories that you actually
forget who you are.
It's like going to
a really good movie
and getting lost in the movie.
And therefore the only way
to come out of this tangled
hierarchy-- because it is a
tangled hierarchy where we lose
ourselves in the scenery--
The seer loses itself
in the scenery.
The lover loses
himself in the beloved.
The knower loses
himself or herself
in the objects of
knowledge, never remembering
that there is a timeless
factor in the midst
of every time-bound experience.
All experience is time-bound.
It has a beginning, a
middle, and an ending.
But in the midst of all this,
there's a timeless factor.
It's the experiencer.
And the experiencer is
the "I" inside, not just
the personal "I," but
the collective "I"
and the universal "I."
That if I start to peel
the layers of my soul,
I'll go beyond my
constricted fabrication--
the constricted self-identity
that I have-- and I'll
discover who I really am.
And this is the
essence of Vedanta.
And Vedanta says there
are four ways to do it.
It's as simple as that.
The first is called
Karma Yoga, which
is to be always
reminding yourself
that no matter what you're
doing, you're not doing it.
It's God.
God does everything.
There is only God, and
this is the machinery
through which that divine
intelligence is working.
So the essence of Karma Yoga
is to be established in being
and perform action.
Yogastha Kuru Karmani
as Lord Krishna
says in the Bhagavad Gita.
The second way to
find the truth--
to find the nature of
reality-- is through love--
the experience of love, which
is Bhakti Yoga, or devotion.
And it's the simplest
and most enjoyable,
but it gets you
to the same place.
So that's the second
means to find the truth.
Because love is the
ultimate reality.
And love is not a mere emotion.
Love is not a mere sentiment.
It's the ultimate truth
at the heart of creation.
And the ultimate truth
at the heart of creation
is that we are all the same
being in different disguises.
When we feel that,
then it becomes
impossible to hurt or be hurt.
What the Buddha refers
to as compassion
is really also the
experiential knowledge
of love as the ultimate truth
at the heart of creation.
The third means is
Raja Yoga, which
is meditation and its
allied disciplines,
all the different
types of ways to dive
into the gap between
our thoughts,
to go beyond the secret
passages and the dark alleys
of our minds and find this part
of ourselves that does not die.
And that is the
discipline of Raja Yoga,
the meditation and its allied
principles, or techniques.
And the fourth means is
what is called Gyan Yoga.
Unfortunately, I've lost myself
in that for my entire life.
Gyan Yoga is the
intellectual approach,
which is also called the
razor's edge, because you're
using the intellect to
go beyond the intellect
and that in itself
seems to be a paradox.
But it's possible
to use the intellect
and go beyond the
intellect ultimately,
to go beyond the rational way.
And that, essentially,
is all of Vedanta.
All the 112 Upanishads,
somehow or the other,
talk around these
few principles.
If one has gotten close to
the event horizon, which
is called enlightenment in
both the Vedantic tradition
and the Buddhist tradition,
then that experiential knowledge
of immortality
solves all suffering,
because you find out
who you really are.
As the Sufi poet Rumi has
said in one of his most
elegant poems-- he says, by
God, when you see your beauty,
you'll be the idol of yourself.
I've just done a new
translation of Tagore's poems.
And I chose his poems on the
phenomenon and the experience
of death because I've always
wondered what would it
be like to be in that
place in your consciousness
where you have lost all
fear and can embrace death
as lovingly and in as
much a celebratory mood
as you can approach life.
You can only do it if
you have come home.
And so what I'd like
to do before I end
is read to you
about three or four
of these contemporary
translations
that I have just
done from Tagore.
And I'll wear my fancy
glasses to do that.
But you can see what it
must be to be in that place.
These poems were written by
the Indian poet Tagore, who
won the Nobel Prize in 1913.
Bengali poet, who
was not just a poet.
He was a real Rishi,
he was a real seer,
and he had really
understood Vedanta.
And towards the end
of his life, when
he was approaching his so-called
death, this is what he wrote.
And I'd like to read you--
just for a minute or two--
what he said.
He said, "I know
that the day will
come when my sight of
this earth shall be lost,
and life will take
its leave in silence,
drawing the last
curtain over my eyes.
Yet stars will watch at night,
and morning rise as before,
and hours heave like sea waves
casting up pleasures and pains.
When I think of this
end of my moments,
the barrier of
the moments breaks
and I see by the light
of death your world
with its careless treasures.
Rare is its lowliest seat,
rare is its meanest of lives.
Things that I longed for in
vain and things that I got--
let them pass.
Let me but truly
possess the things
that I ever spurned
and overlooked."
Other people have said
that if you were aware
that death is stalking you
right now-- I look behind myself
and the Prince of Death is
stalking me, and, in fact,
if I look back
again, it's closer.
If I was aware that
death is stalking me
in every moment of
my life, my life
would be magical because I
would change my priorities.
As he says, "things
that I longed for
and things that I
got-- let them pass.
Let me but truly
possess the things
that I ever spurned
and overlooked."
Here, again, he says--
and look at the splendor
and magnificence of his
mood as he approaches
his final moments-- "At
this time of my parting,
wish me good luck, my friends!
The sky is flushed with the
dawn and my path lies beautiful.
Ask not what I have
with me to take there.
I start on my journey with empty
hands and an expectant heart.
I shall put on my
wedding garland.
Mine is not the red-brown
dress of the traveler,
and though there are
dangers on the way
I have no fear in my mind.
The evening star will come
out when my voyage is done
and the plaintive notes
of the twilight melodies
will be struck up from
the King's highway."
And one or two more--
"I was not aware of the
moment when I first crossed
the threshold of this life.
What was the power
that made me open out
into this vast mystery like a
bud in the forest at midnight?
When in the morning I
looked upon the light,
I felt in a moment that I was
no stranger in this world,
that the inscrutable
without name and form
had taken me in its arms in
the form of my own mother.
Even so, in death
the same unknown
will appear as ever known to me.
And because I love
this life, I know
I shall love death as well.
The child cries out when
from the right breast
the mother takes it away
in the very next moment
to find in the left
one its consolation."
And the final one--
"When I go from hence, let
this be my parting word,
that what I have seen
is unsurpassable.
I have tasted of the hidden
honey of this lotus that
expands on the ocean of life
and light, and so I am blessed.
Let this be my parting word.
In this playhouse of infinite
forms, I have had my play
and here I have caught sight
of him that is formless.
My whole body and
my whole limbs have
thrilled with his touch
who is beyond touch.
And if the end comes
here, let it come.
Let this be my parting word."
Thank you very much.
>>Thank you, Deepak.
[APPLAUSE]
What I feel in my
heart really is
like a feeling of
tribute to India,
to the great Mahabharata,
great Mother India.
Because somehow in the dawn
of the world-- 2,500 years ago
or 3,000 years ago-- the dawn of
this recent era of the world--
somehow India is the great
place where people really saw
most deeply, I think, really.
This American, Euro
American culture,
the sort of product of New York
that produced New York, that
produced some
aspects of ourselves,
our conditioning is based
in the Mediterranean.
Things of itself, as coming
from the Mediterranean.
But actually the Mediterranean
was connected by a toll road,
like the superhighway
of that time that
was maintained by
the Achaemenids--
the Persians-- which went
right to the Indus River.
And every conqueror worth their
salt in the Mediterranean world
wanted nothing better but to go
to India and conquer something.
They didn't know
what, but they knew
they wanted to get there because
they knew that people in India
were having more fun.
[LAUGHTER]
And they wanted, of
course, to go ahead
and grab that themselves.
They were there with
their olives and Retsina,
and they were dreaming of
2,500 varieties of mango.
[LAUGHTER]
Now, interestingly, that
land of such a great wealth--
by far the greatest illuvia
of Eurasia-- the Ma Harrappan
civilization-- Mohenjo-daro--
the five rivers of the Indus--
was at its height
15 times larger
than ancient Egypt, a larger
illuvium with more people
and more wealth and
more produce and so on.
And therefore it is
in such a country
that-- such a land--
that people first came
to both Veda and then Vedanta.
Veda meaning knowledge.
Vedanta meaning, in a way,
the end of knowledge--
the final conclusion
of knowledge.
It occurs to me,
too, that somehow
one of the great
Vedantists really
was Buddha in the sense that
the Vedantic revolution,
you could say, in the middle
of the first millennium
before the Common Era--
or starting, really,
at the beginning of
the first millennium
before the Common Era but
ending in the middle--
was the time when people threw
off the first level of God--
the god, the protector,
the tribal god,
god the one who is
somehow connected
with your fight for survival.
Because in India at
that time, survival
became relatively easy.
Things were relatively
well-organized.
Life was more gentle really
actually in that place.
And so people threw
off that and they
decided that the human
being need not fear reality.
And they decided
that the human being
was capable of knowing reality.
This was the great insight.
Do you realize,
Deepak, in 10 minutes
you brilliantly conveyed
the essence of Vedanta?
And then the very first
thing that you said
was everything was
contained, too,
which is that the only
reason that we suffer
is that we do not know
what our own reality is.
And that do not knowing is--
and Buddha put it sometimes,
he put it to force
just like that.
There was no difference.
The first thing-- I want to
definitively announce there
is no difference between
Buddha Dharma and Vedanta.
Absolutely no difference.
Some semantic confusion
people attach to,
but really there
is no difference.
The crux and the essence of
it is that this not knowing
is not merely just like I don't
know what is in that pipe.
I do not know what
is behind that wall.
That sort of not knowing
doesn't really hurt me.
The kind of not knowing is that
I think I do know what I am,
I think I do know what you are.
I'm Bob.
You are Deepak.
And Bob is not Deepak.
And somehow Bob is not you.
And Bob is like
therefore worrying
because there's so many more
of you than there is Bob.
And so if I think you
and Bob are different,
then it's like, well,
who's going to get whom?
Who is safe from whom?
Then I think, maybe
God is not me.
I think, maybe this
pillar is not me.
The floor, the objects.
I misknow myself
as a separate self.
I misknow the other
as a separate other.
I'm put in the situation,
therefore put myself
through this misknowing in
the situation of struggling
with the universe.
You struggle with the universe.
Who do you think
is going to win?
You know you're going
to lose, of course.
I mean, now and
then you're feeling
a little bit excited or happy
or wearing a Donna Karan suit,
maybe you think you'll win.
You know, you feel so good.
But underneath, you
know you'll lose.
And therefore, that you
can be a little giddy
about how it's fine,
but in the long run
you know you are going to lose.
Whereas if you know your nature,
you know that we are the same.
We are one.
Reality is one.
You are the universe.
How can you lose?
There's no opponent, you see.
And this is the wonderful
thing about India.
It comes from India
the idea that we can
know our way free of suffering.
Now you could call
it Jnana Yoga,
you can call it Bhakti
Yoga, this and that,
but it isn't just intellectual,
because this kind of Jnana
is not mere intellectual.
It is, of course,
not not intellectual,
because knowing the nature
of needs the intellect
at least to get focused.
But then through
Raja Yoga method,
through meditative thing,
through Karma Yoga,
through acting in a way
that you are acting in tuned
with everything, and
finally through love--
because once you know
you are everything then
you're way of experiencing
energy-wise being everything
is the same thing as love.
Why do we like being in love?
Because, remember,
when we're not in love
we're all alone
against the universe
and it's outdoing
us all the time.
Suddenly we feel one with
another being-- usually is
all we can manage.
[LAUGHING]
And it's usually also
temporary because we,
for that moment where
we're really happy in love
is where we're only
living for the happiness
of the other being.
We lose ourselves
in the beloved.
We die in the beloved.
We do.
And then at a certain point,
we feel, that's enough of that.
How much are they
losing themself in me?
And then immediately the
separation is reaffirmed.
And then it's like,
who is more with who?
And then it's endless
dissatisfaction.
But that moment, that
expansion of the identity
to be two or two
as one, imagine,
therefore, like in the
state of enlightenment
our actual reality,
our actual birthright
as human beings-- as
aware, reflective beings--
which is that we have
the ability, the right,
and the natural
tendency to be in love
with all beings, the entire
universe all of the time.
God is means.
God the lover.
God means being in
love with everything.
And love, especially also
it means-- remember love--
you know, Bhakti--
doesn't mean just
wishing to possess the beloved.
Love means willing the
happiness of the beloved.
So it's like the endless
expansion into happiness.
So I have to hail India.
Plato, Socrates was into it.
He saw the harmony of the
soul and he saw something
getting out of the cave.
But he was there with
all those tyrants.
And all they had was olives
and a little bit of goat burger
and some Retsina, a few fish.
No big illuvium.
No Greek could manage.
They had to go and conquer
Egypt to get some wheat
because you can't grow that
much in these non-illuvial
countries-- seafaring countries.
We have to thank India for this
and this rediscovery of India
today.
I can confidently announce--
although I'm always
confidently announcing that
something will happen tomorrow
which never happens-- that's
been doing this for 40 years.
And probably it's posthumous.
Later, after I
attain nirvana or I'm
reborn again as
an undergraduate.
[LAUGHTER]
That's why I'm nice
to my undergraduates.
I try to be.
We have not completed our
renaissance in the West.
The West's renaissance
is just beginning.
Its first wave was the discovery
of the humanism and naturalism
of the Greeks, breaking away
from the grip of the church
and the grip of a
lower idea of God--
that God the punisher,
God the ruler,
God is doing this-- that
mostly was dominating people
feeling that their minds were
unworthy, that they could not
understand the
nature of reality.
And we discovered, well,
we can't understand nature,
but then nature was defined
as material nature--
the atom, the mathematics,
the geometry, the pivot.
And so then for
500 years now we've
been discovering nature--
the human nature and nature.
And we've been breaking
away from that spirit.
In fact, we are scared of spirit
because we associate spirit
with the Inquisition, with
some sort of [INAUDIBLE].
So we're running
away from the spirit.
And we think our
renaissance is over.
And then some people even
say, well, that was no good.
The rest of the Enlightenment--
it caused a lot of trouble.
And they're even
giving up, you know.
But our Renaissance
really gets rolling
when we rediscover India.
So this is where I have
to hail to you, Deepak,
because, in a way, you
are the voice of India.
And ironically, you are
educated as a Westerner.
When we did our dialogue
at Columbia, remember,
it was so funny because
you were doing science
and I was doing India.
I was saying, but wait a minute,
Indian science, remember?
>>Yeah.
>>It was counterpoint.
But, you see, India gives us the
courage that we can understand.
Isn't that preposterous?
Who do you think-- if you said
today-- you went and announced
to your employees, to your
friends, to your relatives,
ah, I understand my
nature, I understand
the nature of reality-- if
you announced that, what
do you think they would do?
[LAUGHTER]
They would offer you
a dish of Prozac.
[LAUGHTER]
Or St. John's Wort,
I hope, or maybe
just some nice Ayurvedic remedy.
Because religious,
you can't do that.
Only God knows that on the
religious side in the West.
So nobody can know everything.
And on the scientific
side, you know how they do.
They get billions of dollars,
and they study and study.
And then when they run out of
the dollars, they proclaim,
aha, we learned a
great deal and now we
know so much more about
how much we don't know.
So give us another grand.
Because in principle,
you cannot know.
You cannot understand.
Sometimes, of course, they do
announce-- when their grant
providers are getting
discouraged with them--
they occasionally
announce that, well, we
will be knowing another
60 years of calculations
will bear us out.
We'll have the grand
theory, so give us
another 60 years to prove it.
Whereas in India from this
ancient time, they're saying,
you don't need a machine.
You don't even need mathematics.
I mean, there's an
ornament mathematic.
These machines are useful.
It's all right.
But you don't need that because
you are the wondrous machine.
Long before computers
in this cybernetic age,
you are the wondrous
machine that
can turn around
in your footsteps,
look back into yourself, and
fully understand yourself--
completely understand that
you are not-- there's nothing
in you separate from the
great self of the universe.
As a Vedantic would say
and Buddha would say,
you are selfless with
regard to that petty self.
And your great self
of selflessness
is at one with all beings
and has all knowledge
available to it,
knows everything
by being one with everything.
And when you know that-- and
that's what I always-- I'm
always thinking-- there's
Buddha over there, by the way,
standing over there--
an image-- and there
is another one sitting.
And I'm always-- when I look
at Buddha, I'm thinking,
thank goodness he's smiling.
Imagine-- now I
understand everything.
And then the next minute you're
going, oh, no, what a bummer,
right?
Then we would all be depressed.
But instead they said,
well, when you know,
then you are happy, you see.
It's only by not knowing
that you're unhappy.
Do you realize the
vast difference
in those two possible claims?
Because if our reality
is in fact happiness,
if our reality is in fact
love, if our reality is
in fact wisdom, that
means the more we
can let go of our false
constructions of unreality,
the more we collapse actually,
the more happy we become.
So we don't have to
fight with even--
I was very happy you
announced that we all
have Alzheimer's, because when I
can't remember anybody's name--
I call my children
by the wrong names--
when I can't remember who I am,
then I must be getting happier.
I must be getting better.
I only get miserable when
someone comes and says,
you should know
exactly this and that.
Don't forget that
name, that's terrible.
We don't need to know
someone's name to love them.
In fact, sometimes by
knowing their name too well
you might get used to
disliking them, in fact.
If you forget that you
know-- sometimes I do.
I meet some people nowadays
and they seem to know me.
And they say, oh, you're
not mad at me anymore.
That's great.
I say, I guess not.
Don't tell me what you did.
[LAUGHING]
So anyway, so it is India that
gives us this encouragement.
And therefore India turned--
in this ancient time--
in a different direction
than the Greeks
and then the Romans and
then the Europeans and then
the Americans.
They turned-- what I
call-- towards-- they
did the inward turn.
They said that the king and
the queen of the sciences
is the inward science--
the science of how
to know yourself, how
to know your world,
how to know the gods, how
to know God-- depending
on what you mean by it.
In the Vedanta, they
have this wonderful idea
they call Nirguna Brahman
and Saguna Brahman-- showing
how they qualify--
that means qualified
God-- God with properties,
God with personality,
God with attitude.
So it was like putting
a burning bush someplace
or destroying somebody
who gets him mad.
He's the kind of
God with attitude.
But then there's
God beyond attitude.
And God beyond attitude
is no different from us,
and therefore nothing
to be afraid of.
So anyway, OK.
So the first klesha, that's my
feeling about the first klesha.
So now I'll turn it back to you.
>>I just have to say
one thing, and that
is that where our
science is going today--
the direction our
is actually coming very close
to this Vedantic or Buddhist
perspective.
>>Absolutely.
>>Because if you look
at our technology
today, whether it's
sending someone an e-mail
or surfing on the internet
or using a cell phone,
all these technologies are based
on a very fundamental premise
in science.
And that fundamental
premise in science
is that the essential
nature of the material world
is that it's not material,
that the essential nature
of the physical world is
that it's not physical,
that the essential stuff of
the universe is non-stuff.
But not only is it non-stuff,
it's thinking non-stuff.
Because if you go
into the atom and you
go beyond the atom--
which is the basis of all
our technology--
what do you find?
You find an empty void.
And this empty void
is not a nothingness.
It's the womb of creation.
>>Full of energy.
>>It's infinite energy.
>>Infinite energy and
infinite information.
And not only is it information,
it's information that
feeds back on its own self.
It has a feedback loop.
And when information
becomes self-referral,
then it's no longer information.
Living information is
living intelligence.
So nowhere-- no matter where
the computer programmers
go with their sophisticated
feedback loops--
nowhere in that model-- unless
you explain consciousness
and understand this
Vedantic/Buddhist perspective--
nowhere is there an
explanation for what
we call free will or insight
or intention or imagination
or inspiration or creativity
or knowingness or understanding
or decision-making or meaning.
The meaning, the understanding,
the insight, the intent--
no matter how sophisticated
artificial intelligence
becomes, it doesn't
lie in the program.
It lies in the consciousness
of the programmer.
>>Absolutely.
>>And if you use
symbols-- you say,
I'll use symbols to give
meaning-- then you'll
have to create other symbols
to explain the symbols that
give the meaning.
>>That's right.
>>So no matter where
you go, ultimately you
get into-- there is nothing
out there that is not
I. There is nothing
I. The very fact of
something separate from me
is a fundamental illusion.
But it can't be just
an intellectual idea.
It has to be the experience
that-- what being in love
is actually.
>>You made me
remember-- I actually
wanted to finish-- [INAUDIBLE].
But you made me remember
what I wanted to finish,
which is the great Bengali
Atisa Dipankara Shrijnana--
who went to Tibet in the 11th
century and was the founder
of the new wave of Tibetan
Buddhism at that time--
he was asked once-- because you
made me think of it when you
mentioned about abstraction
and practical living--
He was asked once-- he
said, well, Atisa, you're
the great master, you taught all
the Dharma, blah, blah, blah.
He said, but could you
tell us a practical thing--
one Tibetan nobelman said--
he said, well, what is that?
He said, well, could you give
us a little marriage counseling?
This is my favorite marriage
counseling in the universe.
And Atisa, said, oh, no,
you go talk to someone else.
Then he said, no, please, we
want some marriage counseling.
So then he said, OK, you ready?
And he said, we're ready.
He said, husband and wife,
each of them will soon be dead.
[LAUGHTER]
Therefore while living they
should be nice to each other.
[LAUGHTER]
It's not quite Tagore, but it's
to the point, don't you think?
>>Absolutely.
>>I'm sorry.
I just--
>>No.
>>Go ahead.
But death is great, you know.
When I translated the
"Book of the Dead"-- which
I didn't want to do
because I thought
there were enough translations.
But then I remembered my
guru-- my old Mongolian guru
who was the teacher of--
where do we cross paths-- oh,
Ray Chambers' teacher, too--
who I met in the desert
flats of New Jersey.
You know what it
means for a New Yorker
to go-- I went all the
way to India first,
and then I met him in the
desert flats of New Jersey--
my guru-- just beyond
the refineries there.
That's a real shock
to a New Yorker.
Talk about non-duality.
And-- what was I going to say?
>>He convinced you
to write about death.
>>Oh, yeah.
And he gave me this book.
And he said one time-- the copy
of the "Book of the Dead"--
that I wasn't at all interested
in it-- and I said, oh,
that's OK.
I keep it in the library.
He said, no, no, you take it.
You will need it, he said.
And then I said, OK.
Then later someone asked
me to translate it.
And because he had
done that, I said,
OK, I'll do it, because
he said I would need it.
But what I discovered in
translating the so-called "Book
of the Dead"-- which isn't
called "Book of the Dead"
in Tibetan-- I discovered
that there are no dead people.
There's no dead people.
And Tibet is this
amazing culture,
which is the child of India.
It's up there on
the crown of India.
It's over the Himalaya.
And when India was
hard-pressed at the end
of the first millennium
with foreign invasions--
the first really major organized
foreign invasions into India--
then this knowledge
tradition, a lot of it
ran up there over the
Himalayas into Tibet.
So it really is totally
connected to India,
whatever anybody says--
political people.
And it's the one place
where culture, therefore,
talks of death as a
natural liberation.
And how can we fear death when
there is only infinite life?
And when you do, the "Book
of Natural Liberation"--
which is what the real name
of the Tibetan so-called "Book
of the Dead" is-- it's the
"Book of Natural Liberation"
through learning in
the between state.
Because the minute we
die, we are totally
aware of our virtual reality.
We are a dream body.
We are a Maya body.
And therefore what you hear
at that time-- imagine--
when you die, by the way,
you should have Deepak turned
on on the video player--
[LAUGHTER]
--because the first
thing you're going
to know-- you're going to be
listening to the same people,
but then your body mind
will really be a mind body.
A [INAUDIBLE].
The minute you're
dead, this thing
will be lying
there-- this wetware.
All the wetware will be
lying there, like ugh.
And you'll be there, and you'll
be wondering, who is that?
And you'll be there.
And then if Deepak
is on the video,
he'll be saying, bring
those neuropeptides
into oneness with Brahma.
And you will experience that
immediately because you'll
totally-- whatever you
experience in this totally
fluid manmade body has no
resistance from a concrete body
filled with fight-and-flight
syndromes and all
of these instinctual
reaction patterns.
So you're nine times more
intelligent, they say in Tibet,
the minute you're dead.
>>Can I give the conceptual--
>>Please.
>>--map for different
states of consciousness
>>Please.
>>--and see what
the parallels are?
Because there are--
>>I hope you can.
>>[INAUDIBLE] are.
>>Please do.
Please do.
>>OK.
So the way Vedanta
describes all of reality
is a projection of which state
of consciousness you're in.
So depending on the state
of consciousness you're in,
you project a certain
kind of reality.
The first state of
consciousness is deep sleep.
And in deep sleep, you also
have a certain reality.
There's a limited
degree of awareness.
If I come and scream at
you, I say there's a fire on
or your child is crying and
you happen to be the mother,
then you immediately
respond to that,
which means that your
spirit is in surveillance
even in deep sleep.
And the spirit creates its own
physiology for that moment.
So everyone has
experienced that.
No need to belabor the point.
The second state of
consciousness is dreams.
Now what we have is a little
more repertoire of experience
and our brain is functioning
a little differently.
There are stories that are being
weaved by the karmic software.
And when we are
dreaming, it's very real.
No one can convince us
that this is not real.
It's only after we wake
up that we look back
and say, oh, that was
an interesting dream.
The insight that it
was a dream happens
after you wake up
from the dream,
not in the dream-- unless
you're a lucid dreamer, which
is a whole different
thing which we don't
want to talk about right now.
But the insight that
that was a dream only
occurs after you wake
up from the dream.
Now Vedanta says when you
wake up from that dream,
you wake up into another dream.
And that other dream
is what you call
waking state of consciousness.
Presumably you're at
least in that right now.
[LAUGHTER]
So if you're in that waking
state of consciousness,
then you're participating
in it just like you
were participating in the
dream and you don't know
that it's equally ephemeral.
It's equally transitory.
It's equally insubstantial.
It's equally illusionary.
And therefore, of
course, you get caught up
in the melodrama
and the hysteria
and the anxiety of the dream
because you think it's real.
And you will remain in it
until you wake up from it.
And then after you
wake up from it,
then you'll have
the insight, aha,
what an interesting
state that was.
So, of course, we have different
words, bardos and so on.
But here we wake up
from the waking state
into what Vedanta calls the
fourth state of consciousness.
The fourth state
of consciousness
when you have a first
glimpse of your soul.
People, when they had that, it's
been very dramatic for them.
Sir Walt Whitman
says, I must not
be awake for
everything looks to me
as it never did before
or else I'm awake
for the first time and all that
was before was just a dream.
Gautama Buddha himself--
this lifetime of ours
is as transient
as autumn clouds.
To watch the birth
and death of beings
is like looking at the
movements of a dance.
A lifetime is like
a flash of lightning
in the sky rushing
by like a torrent
down the steep mountain.
But now I'm awake-- which is
the meaning of the word buddha.
He's asked at the moment of
his death, are you a prophet?
He says, no.
Are you the messiah?
He says, who are you?
He says, I'm awake.
That's all he says.
That's the meaning of the word
buddha-- the awakened one.
Waking up from the
insubstantial reality,
into glimpsing the soul.
So actually we could try
something right now with you.
You could glimpse
it even this moment.
As you're listening to me,
just turn your attention
to who's listening.
So as you're listening to
me, just turn your attention
to who's listening.
There's a presence there.
It's not your mind.
Your mind is still noisy.
Just turn your attention
to who's listening.
And that silent witness--
that ever-present witnessing
awareness-- is the soul.
And once we start
glimpsing it, then we
start to peel the
layers of that.
And that ever-present
witnessing awareness
is there even in deep sleep,
even in dreams, and even
in wakefulness.
So the experience that Bob
was saying, you're dying
and you see the body out
there and you can witness it,
well, both Buddha and Vedanta
say, you can do that now.
You don't have to wait
until the moment of death.
And if you enter that now,
you will not fear death.
Why?
Because the unknown then will
be known to you, as Tagore says.
And when the unknown is
known, what's there to fear?
To have that ever-present
witnessing awareness in sleeps,
in dreams, in waking state,
is to suddenly wake up
to the full reality of the soul.
In Vedantic traditions it's
called cosmic consciousness.
It's the fifth state of
consciousness, the fourth being
just glimpsing the soul.
And then beyond that,
what Vedanta describes
as the sixth state
of consciousness
where the ever-present
witnessing awareness becomes
obvious to you cognitively
and perceptually even
in the objects of
your perception.
So you look at that
tree and you say, yes.
And the Buddhists
have this technique.
You look at that tree,
and you look long enough
in that special state
of meditative awareness,
and you see there's a tree
there but there are also
rainbows and sunshine and earth
and water and wind and space
and the infinite void and the
whole history of the universe
right there in that tree.
And you go beyond that and
you see there's a spirit,
there's a soul,
there's a presence,
there's an ever-present
witnessing awareness
right there.
And that's called the sixth
state of consciousness.
And then a time comes when
the ever-present witnessing
awareness here in the
subject of perception
and there in the
object of perception
is actually the same presence.
The whole thing was a perceptual
artifact to begin with.
So there's only one witness,
and the whole universe
is an expression of that.
And that is what Buddha
calls enlightenment.
>>Exactly.
>>And it's not that
difficult to understand.
You can actually map out these
different states of awareness
and soon hopefully have
the research grants
to look at how the
brain functions
in these different
states of awareness.
So that people really
for the first time
feel that this is not mere
esoteric Eastern philosophical
metaphysical speculation that
occurred in the consciousness
of some enlightened beings.
Because we all have
the same hardware,
the same nervous system.
And what was possible for
Buddha, he himself says
is possible for you.
We are the Bodhisattvas.
>>And that sure
generates, Deepak, I
call it Depanta, not Vedanta,
not Buddhanta, Depanta.
>>No!
>>Depanta.
That is Depanta.
And that is why I say
it's a renaissance.
I mean, India is the
mother where people
were less harassed, who
asserted their ability
to know their own reality.
That's the reason there
were more of them.
There were plenty of them
in the Mediterranean, too,
but then some tyrant
would arrest them.
Even Socrates, what
did they give Socrates?
We call it a hemlock
milkshake around campuses.
It's not too healthy.
It's not a fruit shake.
And so they wiped them
out in other places
because the authority wanted
everybody just not feeling
that they know everything.
They wanted everybody
just working.
They wanted them obeying orders.
So it happened everywhere.
But what we have to
have on the planet
now-- secularism
and the pretensions
of materialistic science are
not really believed broadly
on the planet anymore.
What people call
fundamentalism--
which exists in Hinduism,
in Islam, in Christianity,
in Buddhism, in every one
of the world religions now,
Eastern Orthodoxy-- it's
asserting itself very
powerfully again in the world.
And that trend will continue.
Because there is
disillusionment in the promises
of the great secular
materialist age.
We're going to save everybody.
Everybody's going to
have a stainless steel
pacemaker and a new brain that
they're going to make in some--
and IBM is going
to-- Bill Gates is
going to come and
live in your brain
and make everything work well.
Ha ha ha.
And people are really giving
that up on the planet.
But then if spirituality
returns in this old way
where people are
content and where
there's a few mystics
who are allowed to know
and everybody else is supposed
to just believe and obey.
And they're going to
have a vengeful god
or they're going to have
this kind of jealous god
that kind who's going to go
and say kill the unbelievers.
We're going to have
absolute chaos.
There's going to be
anthrax Crusades.
There's going to be nuclear
religious wars and things.
It's just totally impossible.
So there should
be now a Manhattan
Project of the spirit, a
Manhattan Project of the mind.
If anybody had any brains
today, they would be doing that.
But my point is this
is a national priority
because people go, oh
well-- Do you really
think people could understand?
No, no, never.
They'll never understand.
No, no, Jerry Falwell is
going to always be an idiot.
Or else he's going to be
great and the rest of us
will be Satan.
Whatever.
Hopeless polarization is coming.
Believe me, the
new religious wars
are going to make the old
ones seem like a tea party.
Nuclear tipped crusaders
running around like la-di-da.
It's going to be
really terrible.
The only solution is
to take our ingenuity,
to take our technologies,
to take our information age
and make it where
Buddha is on satellite.
We have Academy Awards.
We have enlightenment
awards, and a billion people
simultaneously can meditate on
recognizing the self in others.
No, really.
And they can do that.
People definitely can do that.
I know some Tibetans
who don't know much.
They can chase their
yaks around a field.
They don't have a great
deal of knowledge.
They have Bhakti.
But they have been
steeping themselves
in a culture that understands
the connection of knowledge
and love and understands that--
through their theory of karma,
of course, and reincarnation--
that we have all
been reborn infinitely--
intertwined, all of us.
We've all been lovers.
Even the guys.
We've all been
parents and children.
We've all been enemies, too,
but we won't be mentioning that.
We've all had all different
kinds of problems,
but we've been
infinitely intertwined.
So when this kind of toothless
Tibetan today out there
with their yak, knowing
very little, looks at you,
you feel that they see
the kinship in you.
And that's all that is needed.
So that when your wild, crazy
Muslim fundamentalist looks
at your wild, crazy
Lynchburg, Virginia Protestant
fundamentalist, the two
are looking at each other
with their each notion of a
triumphal nuclear-tipped god.
And yet they look beyond
that and they see kin.
They see this one guy wearing
pajamas and this other guy
wearing his little puffy
suit, that they're kin.
Then they won't kill each other.
The change in consciousness
that is planet-saving for our--
when you say maya,
I always think
my grandchild's name is Maya.
I can't help it.
When I think of
Maya projecting, I'm
thinking of my little
Maya grandchild
who is so cute, such
a gentle projection.
>>Of Brahman.
>>At the moment.
Of Brahman, exactly.
But what are we doing with
children and grandchildren
and whatever if we're not going
to take the fate of this planet
seriously?
And how can we
condemn this planet
to a bunch of fanatics with
nuclear weapons and germ
weapons?
I won't get into it, but the
germ business from Russia
spreading everywhere through
Asia and the Middle East,
it's truly terrifying actually.
Truly terrifying.
I'm very into this Sri-- second
renaissance-- the goddess Sri.
Isn't that Vishnu's consort?
>>Right.
But I think in order to make
that happen, we must not
create the schism that
currently exists between science
and spirituality.
>>Absolutely.
>>Because that is the
divide right now--
either you're a scientist or
you are a spiritual being,
and the two have nothing
to do with each other.
>>Right.
>>Mystical poets, et
cetera, have had insights
without going into the
science or the logic of it.
So there's a poem.
Again, Rumi-- from the 12th
century-- in one of his poems,
he says, "I have lived
on the lip of insanity,
wanting to know reasons,
knocking at the door.
The door opens.
I've been knocking
from the inside."
Now we all get that immediately.
But now what the
scientists are also
saying-- at least
in quantum physics--
is that the cosmologist
who studies the cosmos
is an expression of the cosmos.
The physicist who studies
the laws of physics
is an expression of
those laws of physics.
So there's no such thing
as objective science.
It's all subject,
object, process
of interaction, as you said,
woven together-- inextricably
woven together.
Science has to change.
The way science is
done has to change.
>>Right.
Well, it is changing slowly--
>>Slowly.
>>--but then there's
all this resistance
because they're indulged in
being the great authority.
But, you know, the Buddhists
have a saying, Deepak,
that the Dalai Lama often
says in his dialogues
with the scientists, but he
never says it too loudly.
And I don't think that they've
quite heard yet-- some,
but quite.
And that is that there's
three levels of relativity
from Buddha's
teaching-- three levels.
And the first level
of relativity,
which is the coarsest one,
is where Buddhism and science
completely meet but
with a different focus--
Buddhists toward the interior
as more important-- not
exclusively important.
The exterior is also important--
medicine and biology all
that is important-- but the
interior is more important.
That's cause and
effect-- causality.
And that's the first level.
And there there's
attunement, and there
can be a lot of dialogue.
The second level is the
level of part and whole
and analyzing the thing in
terms of parts and wholes.
And that's a more subtle level.
And there's also, however--
with the subatomic
and the microdimension
and everything--
there's also parity there and
there's interconnectedness
with science.
>>Beautifully.
>>The third level is the
level of word and referent,
or concept designation
and designated,
where the mind is
involved through the word,
through [NON-ENGLISH]
>>Because there's nothing
that exists for which
you don't have a word.
>>Exactly.
And, in fact, the word is
co-creative with the things
so that subject and object
interconnect with name
and form, as they say.
And if you take Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle
and you say that the
subjectivity is, in fact,
warping the objectivity
in observing it,
that destroys the notion of
the privileged observer who
observes reality, quote
unquote, "objectively," not
being a participant
in reality, which
was the Western
exaggeration in the attempt
to escape from the church.
>>I hope everybody gets this
because it's very important
what he's saying just now.
>>So they have that Heisenberg.
And then they just
think the language
is mathematics,
which is, of course,
a brilliant and
wonderful language.
But it's even ordinary words.
It's mantra is what it is.
The ultimate scientific
use of language
is-- and poetic, where science
and poetry meet-- is mantra.
You know, [NON-ENGLISH] And
this mantra is where word is
co-creative with form and with
life and with vibrancy and with
liberation and so forth.
And that's where it all is
now and then quietly says
in the middle of these dialogues
where the great scientists are
talking about all their great
technology, he's saying,
we're waiting to talk there
on that level of relativity
where people are responsible
for their mind's engagement
and creative engagement
with reality.
What Deepak calls where
the creative level
of God, the creator--
sixth level,
I hope-- I am getting it right?
Sixth or fifth.
>>Fifth.
Fifth, yeah.
>>Fifth level.
You see, I'm not that
well-schooled yet.
Fifth level of God where the
individual takes responsibility
of co-creating
with God the world,
which does not just mean
that you're some big deal.
It means you better be careful
what you think, what you say,
because it creates.
It's creative.
It's divine.
Right?
>>Absolutely.
>>What you said is so important.
Can I--
>>Please.
>>--explain?
The concept that Bob has just
expressed of co-creation--
see, there's
constantly this, again,
antagonism between
the materialists, who
say that matter causes the
subjective experience--
so I look out there and
everything out there
causes me to have a
subjective experience.
The materialists say that.
Other people say, no,
it's like-- what's
his name-- Bishop.
Do you know who I'm talking--
>>[INAUDIBLE]
Right.
>>He says, no, it's
the other way around.
Consciousness projects itself
as the material universe.
And what Buddhism says
is you're both wrong.
We are interbeings that
arise in the inter-isness
and we're constantly
co-creating each other out
of that inter-isness.
And what physics calls that
now is a tangled hierarchy.
A tangled hierarchy
is something that you
can't get out of it
because the tangle is
infinitely interwoven.
So to make it
simple-- in grammar,
a tangled hierarchy would
be the following sentence--
I am a liar.
See, the subject qualifies the
predicate and the predicate
qualifies the subject.
If I say, I am a liar,
then if I'm lying,
I'm telling the truth.
And if I'm telling the
truth, I must be lying.
So what am I?
Am I truthful or am I a liar?
That's a tangled
hierarchy in grammar.
And you cannot get out of the
tangled hierarchy while you
stay in it.
The only way to get out
of the tangled hierarchy
is to jump out of the system--
to transcend the system.
And in this case,
in grammar, you
would say, who's making that
statement-- I am a liar?
And the one who's
making that statement
has the potential for both
lying and telling the truth.
So you understand what
a tangled hierarchy is?
Now in physics,
tangled hierarchy
says that the
subject of experience
and the object of
experience co-arise
simultaneously moment by moment
from a transcendent domain
which is beyond space and time.
And that's who you are.
You are neither the
subject nor the object
nor the process of interaction
between subject and object,
but the potential
for the whole thing--
for the subject, the object,
and the process of interaction.
This is very Vedantic
and very, very much--
>>Depantic.
Depantic.
>>--Buddhism.
>>This is where Buddhantic
and Vedantic I think
are very mutually reinforcing.
Because imagine yourself now--
just for a moment-- suddenly
experiencing-- don't
think that, oh,
enlightenment, some other
day, some other life,
some other time.
Imagine yourself experiencing
being all the other people
simultaneously with
yourself, entangled in that.
Imagine everyone thinks, oh,
Buddha is blissful, therefore,
oh, I don't have to
worry about Buddha.
So they would never
want to imagine.
Although they say Buddha is
blissful, but imagine how
blissfully frustrated he is.
Why?
Because he suddenly has
an experience-- or she--
there are Ms. Buddhas and Mrs.
Buddhas and Ms. Buddhas both--
and has this experience
that suddenly--
Just imagine yourself right now.
You suddenly imagine
that you're going ahead
feeling like you're
you-- enclosed
within your
subjectivity [INAUDIBLE]
coming into your sense thing
and to your subjectivity.
And at the same time,
suddenly to your amazement--
on the lip of insanity--
you are perceiving yourself
as everybody else, too,
and yet you're blissful.
You have that expansion because
of a feeling of intense bliss.
You experience all
reality as intense bliss.
Now you look over
there, and you find
you don't have to look too far--
of course no one in this room,
so it will be hard
to imagine here--
but you don't have
to look too far
and you'll see somebody
with a really grim look
on their face, real
furrowed brow, deep headache
and suffering and misery.
And you're experiencing every
cell in their being as a bliss,
and they have caught themselves
up in the theater of torment.
And they haven't got enough
and they're mad at somebody
and they're wronged by somebody
and they're deeply wounded
and they're like, can't do
it, and it's all after them.
And you're seeing this person
creating hell for themself.
And you see every synapse
and cell and neuropeptide
within that as bliss, and yet
you can't just bliss them out
of it, because they perceive
your energy-- flowing
to them as a bliss-- they
perceive it as more pressure,
and then they fold that into
their theater of torment.
This is compassion.
Then you have to put on
some sort of a theater.
You have to think of
how to distract them.
It's like, hey-- it's like a
kid who's having a tantrum.
You have to like--
oh, look, there's
Mickey Mouse or something
so that they forget
they're having the tantrum.
And Buddha and God
together are thinking
of one theatrical
performance after another
to distract people from turning
their own deeply innate nature
of bliss into some sort
of theater of torment.
So this is where
compassion, non-duality
becomes dynamic activity.
And this is why-- [SANSKRIT]--
explodes with 1,000 arms.
Those 1,000 arms are not
just some freaky thing,
like some kind of weird
millipede or milli-hand.
Those 1,000 arms
symbolize that his heart
is exploding into reaching
into all of the beings' hearts
and lives, trying to do
something to cheer them up,
pat them on the back.
And not to be
clumsy in doing it,
each hand has a sensitive
eye in the palm.
So he sees exactly--
like a bionic robot
seeing in every direction,
reaching into all these lives.
>>The 1,000 arms of compassion.
>>1,000 arms of compassion.
That is what the thing means.
So now think of that 1,000 arms.
Think of your 1,000 arms as
you empathize with all beings.
Your bliss flows beyond being
encased within your skin.
And your bliss becomes the field
awareness of an enlightened
being that enfolds
other lives within it,
and yet doesn't take them over.
It's not body snatching.
It's not taking away their life.
It's just peeling every element
of their life, like a CAT scan,
and letting them have the life.
But then not just letting them
suffer it through-- helping
encourage them to figure
out how to enjoy it.
Any comments or questions?
>>West and East and
science and religion
have been tangoing
for millennia,
and it seems like it
may be coalescing.
And the individual vision
of unity is always present.
Is there a collective
possibility of this occurring?
>>I think there is.
And you would say, why
now, and why never before?
Bob painted a beautiful
picture of the ancient Indian
civilization-- and
it is beautiful--
but I have to say
that we're still
talking about an eclectic group
of luminaries in ancient India.
>>Sure.
>>The majority of Indians
were barbarians and still are.
Sorry.
OK?
Much though, you know.
>>Sure, sure.
I understand.
>>And that's true of the
majority of humanity.
When we think of ancient
Greece, we think of Parmenides,
we think of Socrates,
we think of Plato,
we think of Pythagoras, and we
say, aha, Greek civilization.
But look at what the majority
of Greeks were doing.
They were throwing handicapped
children to the lions.
They were sexist.
They believed in slavery.
So we cannot say
any civilization has
the prerogative or the
privilege for enlightenment,
not even India, with
all due respect.
I'm an Indian.
>>No, no, absolutely.
>>And so we've never
had a golden age.
Never.
There has never
been a renaissance.
The history of human
beings has been the history
of torment and suffering.
So why is there room
for optimism now?
The room for optimism is, A,
because science is catching on.
Science is a wonderful thing.
It can give us monstrosities,
but it can also
create amazing benefits for us.
And the same science that we
can use to destroy the world,
we can create a new age
of real renaissance.
And so the reason
I say there is hope
today is because we
have the internet.
We have media.
And what is a good idea can
collectively, immediately,
saturate a critical threshold
in collective consciousness.
If an idea is appealing,
you cannot stop it.
You cannot stop it.
And the idea of a collective
enlightenment is now being
born, and it cannot be stopped.
It's like a child that comes
out of the womb cannot go back
to the womb.
The idea is born, and with our
technology it will manifest.
>>Mm-hm.
That's great.
I also think,
personally-- because I
locate barbarianhood
right here-- Bob Redneck.
Raw redneck buddhantic.
And barbarism is
here also, mixed.
I don't claim to
perfection at all.
But I count myself lucky
at the blessing of maya,
at seeing maya in the creative.
I think God and Brahma
and Indra and Buddha
and all the bodhisattvas
and all the goddesses
and the female buddhas
and so forth-- I
think they've
surrounded humanity.
Like science, for example,
being materialistic,
they're trying to grab and cling
and misknow and make atoms.
And then the atom, one
day, sort of pops up,
and there's Buddha in
that atom-- and Brahma are
coming out of the atom.
And it's like we're surrounded
by angels without realizing it.
And they've created
this network of-- we
call it-- it's
called-- actually,
in the Indian vision--
Indian mythology-- the jewel
net of Indra is an expression.
And the jewel net of
Indra is this network
of jewels-- that's from
ancient time in India
before there was computers
and TVs and things.
In the [INAUDIBLE]-- there's a
city on the top of the Indian
Olympus-- of the Indian
cosmology-- where Indra rules,
which is actually
only a lower heaven--
way below the Brahma heavens.
But it is one kind of
real estate type heaven--
which is like Olympus-- they
have a really good time.
They have the best
jacuzzis-- much better
than Palm Springs or
Bel Air, or whatever--
and they hang out up there.
But the one thing that they
have is this jewel net of Indra.
And this jewel net
hangs over the city.
And the net is
faceted in such a way
that when you look in
any facet of the jewels,
you see all the other
facets of the jewels.
So it's like a telephone system.
>>Holographic.
It's holographic.
>>It's a holographic system
that is over that city.
And so this jewel
net of Indra is
hung around the whole planet.
And we see reflected in
that all of each other's
interconnections and souls.
We've been born and
reborn, and we've
gone through this
agony and that agony.
And everybody's back
and nobody is lost.
And no baby has lost
And we're all here,
and we're staring and
glaring at each other.
And we've done each other in
infinite numbers of times,
and we're sick of it.
I'm afraid since the Cold War.
You know, they always
congratulate themselves
on mutually assured destruction.
But I had a vision once--
actually when I was in Almora
actually-- it was 1971--
Bangladesh wartime--
very dangerous time.
The Soviet Union and
China were also fighting.
I think some people did
press some buttons actually.
There were some buttons pressed.
But I saw different
angelic beings.
It was just an Almora vision,
but these very angelic beings
just jammed all
of the computers.
They totally just jammed it all.
No signals were transmitted.
Nothing flew.
And ever since then, I began
to become a little, tiny bit
religious, which
I'm basically like
a hard grained intellectual.
But I really did see that.
And I think we do have this
kind of angelic protection.
We have this destiny.
We have the synchronicity.
This is going to happen now.
It is possible to
happen now, because you
and I and Deepak are
going to make it happen.
Because we won't
let it not happen.
Because we have our children
and our grandchildren.
What did we do that for?
If we're going to turn over
this planet to anthrax merchants
and things, what's the point?
We are going to see to it.
There's all these
nurturing beings around us
that are going to help it out
because we're so incredibly
incompetent.
At least I am.
>>And remember, the nurturing
beings are actually, again,
aspects of ourselves.
>>Of course.
>>The angels.
Rumi says, when I die, I
shall soar with angels.
And when I die as an angel,
what I shall become you cannot
imagine.
>>[INAUDIBLE]
I think Rumi inspired Roosevelt
actually, who of course said,
there's nothing
to fear but fear.
With fear we will
destroy ourselves.
But with love, realizing that if
we even let go of everything--
if you die and you're
embraced by love,
how can you fear death?
If we insist upon that.
>>I was thinking,
as you were talking,
about the spiritual influx--
the Eastern influence--
that we got gradually
in America from India
and from the East in general.
And primarily it was
happening around about the 60s
as a great accentuation.
And that was the period
of the use of drugs.
I am not involved
in the use of drugs,
but I have a great deal
of curiosity about it
in the sense that we have
this-- I think to myself.
I meditate, and I have
this heavy, heavy, heavy
encrustation that I can't seem
to break through in a way.
I think you know
what I'm saying.
I mean, how do we get there?
How do we get there
in this lifetime?
How do I get rid of this
wall to get to reality?
>>Yes.
For many people--
and, by the way,
the '60s generation
has not disappeared.
We're sitting here right now.
I mean, it never went away.
We're sitting right
in front of you.
We are that generation, so
it never really did go away.
That was a sudden appearance
and it has continued to grow.
The media took
away the attention,
and now the media is
bringing back the attention.
But we were never satisfied
with the status quo.
Whether it was the Vietnam--
the anti-war movement,
whether it was ecology,
whether it was feminism.
We're the ones who started it.
A proud generation that is
now reaching its maturity.
That was our adolescence,
that was our puberty,
and now we are reaching our
maturity, or we think we are.
>>I'm over the hill.
>>No, you're not, sir.
I'll tell you when
you get there.
>>OK.
OK, doc.
>>So it has never gone away.
The drug experience for many
was a dramatic experience
into an altered state
of consciousness.
And it's true for many
spiritual traditions
where they use drugs to
immediately-- whether it's
peyote or whether it's
mushrooms or whatever--
to immediately cause a shift--
as Carlos Castaneda would say--
in the assemblage point--
where you assemble
the universe in consciousness.
But to stay with that experience
causes a lot of disintegration.
You can have an experience.
And if it is dramatic
and sudden and radical,
there's a thin line between
sages and psychotics
and geniuses.
It's a motley group of sages
and psychotics as well.
So I would caution that the
drug experience is not the way
to go for anyone, even
though for many-- including,
for instance, the
Beatles and many others--
it was their first insight.
>>The catalyst.
But it's not the way to go.
>>Mm-hm.
Yes.
I would like just to add
about the breaking through
is take a break.
Don't push so hard sometimes.
The beautiful thing about
Vedanta, about Buddhanta,
is that-- and the
difference between that
and some other kinds
of ideas of reality--
is that the reason Buddha was
happy-- the reason he smiles--
is that what he saw is that
it is your actual nature
to be happy, to be
free, to be released.
It is not that you have
to create it and break
through something
to get it elsewhere.
It is actually your nature.
And sometimes trying too
hard to get something
that you conceive
of as a freedom
and misconceptualizing your
actual state as a bondage
can be overexaggerated.
And one can just
relax a little bit.
The Dalai Lama always says--
I think very rightly-- that we
mustn't try too hard and set
too high an image of what we're
trying to get to because
it's actually a trick of how
to defeat our positive outlook.
Just a tiny little bit.
We get a little bit.
Drop by drop, we
fill the bucket.
Step by step, we cross the
forest, we cross the desert.
We don't try to
run the whole time
and then collapse and then
feel that it's impossible,
if you follow me.
So if you feel too much pressure
and too much frustration
about trying to break
through, take a break.
>>Take a break.
Meditate two minutes a day only.
Don't meditate a half an hour.
Two minutes.
And actually one
of the tricks is
to quit when you're
still enjoying it.
Deny it to yourself.
Don't hog up the end
when you're collapsing.
I got to make 30 minutes.
I got to keep meditating.
Then you won't want
to meditate again.
Within your first two
minutes and you're like zing,
then stop.
Then you can't wait
to get back to it.
Play tricks on yourself.
And have fun and take a break.
OK?
I want to thank you, Deepak--
>>It's a privilege.
>>--tremendously--
>>It's a privilege
to be with you.
>>--for coming to visit
us at Tibet House.
[APPLAUSE]
>>Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]